Talking about staff assistants now. And this all
dawned on me with Kent Caperton. And he
represented the student body at a graduation
ceremony and did such a super job. He was better
than anybody on that stage that day. Because among
those first were Caperton, Miller, and Dave
Mayfield. Yeah. Among those first student
assistants. And Kent was the first one. Well, I
think that was a very good idea. And it helped us
immeasurably in certain areas, Kent in
particular, and then Roger Miller too, and others
that followed. But as a result of that kind of
togetherness, we formed, we, Harry Green, and
Peggy Cooper, and me, and Kent, and Roger and
sometimes John Sharp established the Fine Guys
Association, which we referred to as the FGA. And
our main mission was to get together at somebody's
home for Monday night football. And we would down
quite a few beers and refreshments, food and so
forth. and become very close friends. And it was
called the FGA. And Gint and Roger were charter
members. And we teased John Sharp and played like
he wasn't really a full-fledged member. And he
really got upset with us because we'd let him come
to the FGA meetings, but we weren't really sure
enough to make him a charter member. But we had a lot
of good times there. And in our own little world, a
closeness that I've never seen duplicated. I
don't think those kind of things are happening
now. I fear they're not.
How easy was it for you to be completely candid in
answering a question to either of these two men? I
had no qualms about that at all. reported on things
that I had seen or heard that I would not say to you
today right now because I thought it was that
important. Some of them that were really... And
you learned by experience that they were not going
to hold it against you if you said what the truth
was, even though you knew they weren't going to
enjoy that truth. That's true. I had no qualms at
all about saying, look, this is not good news that
I'm about to tell you, but you really need to know
this. And I told them collectively things that I
wouldn't have told my mother. Who would Williams,
on his administrative staff, whom do you think
Williams trusted most or turned to most, relied
upon most? Calhoun. Why were they so compatible?
I think they had comparable racehorse minds down
the same And
I think totally trusted each other. I never did
hear Dr. Williams express any kind of
disappointment or criticism. That whole
operation over there. And he...
He wanted to change. He called me in one day. He
says, Edwin, what would happen? And this is how he
would pay attention to detail. What would happen
if we stopped blowing that damn whistle at the
laundry at 8, 12, and 5, or was it 8, 12, 1, and 5? It
may have been four times a day. And I thought for a
minute, and I said, Dr. Williams, there'll be some
questions about it. but I don't think this
university is going to collapse. He said, call
them and tell them to stop blowing that damn thing
today. And I don't remember who it was. I think it
was Parsons, I guess. Or maybe it was Vestal,
auxiliary services, the laundry. The whistle was
at the laundry. And whoever it was says, my God, are
you kidding? I said, I tell you what. I don't want to
be around here if that thing blows again today. And
so the whistle went out. But he was so funny about
little details that somehow were offensive to him
or unnecessary. And the worst excuse was, well,
we've always done it this way. He did not buy that at
all. Now, I came to the impression that one of the
many talents Dr. Williams had was that at Clemson,
a separate land grant school in the southern
state, which was once all male, all white,
compulsory military, not located on the main
highway, about 100 miles from the capital city
where the state university was located in that
state, that Clemson had gone through many of the
same changes, while he was a faculty member and
administrator there, that A&M had gone through.
So he could rely upon the experience there. He
could understand some of that. Let's see,
athletics. Share any athletic recollections for
both presidents and their relations that you
recall. Mr. Rudder was dead level serious about it
and football in particular. I never heard him say
anything about basketball, baseball, track. He
just was a fiend about football and wanted to whip
everybody's butts. Now that's all there are to it,
including Admiral McCall's Bears. I remember
that before the Cotton Bowl, when we were going to
play Bear Bryant,
I was 68. He
did something I'd never dreamed I would ever see,
and that is he, the president, in his big old gray
suit went down there and gave a pep talk to Gene
Stallings. He could not say Stallings. It was
Stallings and his boys and gave them a pep talk with
tears in his eyes about going out and beating hell
out of Alabama, which they did. And I was at the game
with him, the four of us, and he was so emotional
about it that he said, come with me. And we went down
and got on the cotton bowl field somehow and went
down to the dressing room and he gave them another
speech and they're standing stark naked. And I
told the boy that was on that team out at Eldorado, a
banker not five years ago, Bob Sykes says, have you
ever heard of, I can't remember his name, I said,
yeah. He was on the cotton bowl, the... He said,
yeah, he sure was. He took me to the bank at El
Dorado, and he introduced me, and I said, well,
Charlie, I said, the last time I saw you, you were
starting against these watchmen. And then I
explained. But the Olympic Games came up, and
Randy Mattson was going down, and Mr. Rutter came
to me about six weeks before, maybe two months, and
he says, Edwin, I'm going to buy your way to the
Olympic Games, you and Peggy. And you're going
with me and Henry Clay and Maggie McGee and Sally.
And it's not going to cost you one penny, except
that I want you to get the tickets to all of the
events that we want to go to. And you make the
arrangements for us to stay in a private home in
Mexico City and get us a driver where all of us can
get in one Cadillac and remember Mr. Clay's quite a
large man. We need a big car. And he said, if you will
make all the arrangements where all we have to do is
go and pay for it, you got a trip. I said, you got it,
David. And we got a house with maids and servants
for the man that was in the executive for Kodak
International, South America, Mexico, Central
and South America. He was a judge in the sailing
Olympics. turned his house over to us. And we had a
chauffeur with an old Cadillac that hauled us all
over Mexico City. We went to the track and field. We
saw Randy throw the shot and get the gold medal. And
it was another example of how Mr. Rutter would go to
any ends to further the school in this way through
recognition of athletics. But mainly his love was
for football.
I told you what he said to Shelby about his, he said,
you're going to get the same contract I get,
nothing. But Jack Williams.
considered going to the games, I think, another
necessary responsibility. I think it bored into
tears. There was another tough, long work day.
That's right. And if things didn't go right, it was
another tough encounter with the regents who
spent some time. Dooley Bell was just, I mean, I've
seen him on, field trips with his Walkman radio on,
listening to the TU game. Not A&M, but he wanted to
know who was hopefully beating them at the moment.
And he was quite serious about it. And I had one
picture here I wanted to share with you. There's
one of them.
I
can't help but figure that was the day he was
inaugurated. I can't remember why we were all
there. There's his wife. It must be the day that he
was sworn in as a regent. I think so. Oh boy. I was so
nervous as they were coming out. And I had a little
land camera. And Mr. Rudder said, I'm going to
shake his hand, get a picture of me. And I was so
nervous I had to put the camera on the metal rail to
take this picture. But that was a big event. But
Williams realized that athletics and football in
particular was a flagpole to rally the alumni
around. and played like he enjoyed it, but he
really didn't. Now, we didn't have under either of
them, we didn't have any athletic scandals that I
can recall. No alleged cheating. Not that I
remember. We had some coaches that were
terminated and some new coaches coming and going.
Ballard came in. Right. Stallings out and Ballard
in under Dr. Williams. Right. And as I have heard
the
unverified story that he turned Bud Wilkinson,
the former great coach at OU, as a kind of advisor as
to who to hire. That supposedly. If he did that, I
don't remember it. Somebody told me that it was
Wilkinson that suggested Ballard would be a real
good choice. I remember coming into the. office
one morning and that was one of the times he was
there early and the Lord was there lighting his
pipe and Dr. Williams evidently it all had been
worked out and he said Edmund that's our new
football coach you might want to go meet him but
that was just something that had that he had to go
through but Rutter was you know he was a coach too
yes football coach and that's where he and Miss
Rutter met He was the coach at Brady High School.
She was a teacher. Oh, really? I didn't know that.
She thought he was the handsomest thing she'd ever
seen. And they fell in love and married. Now, she
was from Brady? She was born in Sonora, Texas. Went
to school close to her family's ranch, which is on
an old road between downtown London and the town of
Hext. Hext is on Highway 29 West and London is on the
road that connects Mason with Junction. And she
went to school usually horseback and the
principal of the school's main thrill in life was
catching she and whoever rode with her coming into
town on their horses and driving by his car and
slamming his hand on the side of the car to make the
horses pitch them off. And then she went to UT and
made lots of contacts there. Now, somebody told me
one day that she and John and Nellie Connolly were
undergraduate friends. I think that's right. Is
that right? OK. And the Pickles somehow came in
there, Jake Pickles. They were real close with
Jake Pickles. That wouldn't hurt. Yeah. That
wouldn't hurt. Then I heard also two or three
people who told me about Mr. Rudder and a heifer at
Tarleton that he staked on the football field.
That is the story. And that's where I have it mixed
up. It was at Tarleton, not at A&M. Somehow I had it
in my mind that you're right, it was Tarleton. And
somebody told me that they asked him, what
happened if the heifer didn't produce as much milk
as you needed to sell that day. And then he said,
well, heck, you just add water on those days. Yeah,
that's the story. I got it mixed up on where it was.
And as I understand, the way it began is that he told
the coach that he didn't have enough money and he
was going to drop out and go home and go to work,
depression time. And that the coach talked to
somebody and they came up with the animal. And the
coach said, okay, we can let it graze on the
football field. All right, let's see. Were both of
these families Methodist?
The Williams and the Rudders? The Rudders for
sure. And
I believe the Williams were too, but somehow that
doesn't... In no way do I infer that you needed to be
a Methodist to be a key person at A&M, but they were
both church-going families. They were both good
parents.
Let's see, Williams had, what, an adopted
daughter. The one that was married in his house was
an adopted child. And then a natural daughter.
Yeah, yeah. And then the Rudders. They weren't
there like the Rudder kids were. I knew every one of
them. Now the Rudders were two boys and two girls?
Two boys and three girls. Ann and Jane died, and
then there's Bud and Bob. I had Ann in my first
summer class in 1960.
and she made a good solid grade with me because I had
another faculty member's daughter in that same
class and he was much discombobulated with me
because his daughter had made a B and he told me she
had never made a B at A&M Solid High School. I told
him this was not A&M Solid High School. Then he
blurted out the question, well, what grade did the
old rudder girl make? And I told him she made the
same grade that his daughter made. And he then
cleared his face and said, well, OK, that's all
right then. Somebody apparently had told him that
I had given Ann Rudder an A and his daughter a B. And
that had him very bothered. Let's see, any other
anecdotes, legends, myths about either of those
men in those days?
A funny thing happened one night at one of these
alumni gatherings, the board meetings. Mr.
Rutter went to them. Faithfully, Dr. Williams
would look for any kind of excuse and would send me.
But one night, one weekend rather, we met at
Bandera, Texas. And J. Harold Dunn, who was on that
board, not the NM board, took it upon himself to
make all of the arrangements for our
entertainment at the big dance hall up there that
Saturday night. Dick Winters did a barbecue for
us. And then we all retreated to downtown Bandera,
had reserved seats. And he had some of them's wives
were there for some reason. But for those whose
wives were not there, legitimate escort so
everyone would have someone to dance with. And the
one I had was one of the Frost National Bank ladies
whose husband had been killed in one of the wars.
But Harold Dunn made all of those arrangements and
made sure that we had a good band there that night.
And I was seated next to Mr. Rudder and All of the
sound suddenly stopped, and there were lights
over the doorway so that as people entered, you
could see them. And a small group of five or six
people came in, and there was the most beautiful
human being I've ever seen in my life in a white
silvery gown with sequins all over it,
blonde-headed girl. And I said to Mr. Rudder, you
see that girl there? He says, whoo! I said, I'll bet
you before this night's over, I'll bet you $5 that
she'll let me dance with her. And he said, well,
she's with somebody. I said, I'll bet you $5 I'll
dance with her. He said, you're on. And before they
were seated, the music started, and I went up to
that girl, said hello to her escort or whatever,
and I said, You are about the prettiest thing I've
ever seen. Would you dance with me right now before
you all settle in? She said, sure. And so I steered
her over to this long table. There was Darcy
McQuarrie and Earl Rudder and Harold Dunn and
Maggie McGee, all those old boys. And I could see
Mr. Rudder looking up at me as we were coming to him.
And as we walked by, he had his $5 out. And I picked it
up as I went by. I
told you the airplane story. One time, Mr. Rudder
said, let's go dove hunting. This was in, like,
October.
I said, when do you want to go? We'd gone over to the
Herman Heath place in Austin, Buda, and other
places. And he said, I want to go to the ranch, his
ranch. It was really miserable. It still is. I
said, when do you want to go? And he said, Friday
afternoon. I said, well, how are you going to get to
Lubbock to the game? He says, I'm not going. He
said, I am just sick and tired of
everything that's going on at these ballgames as
much as I love them. I need a break. And I'm not going
to the Lubbock game. But I have to be out of town. I
said, sure, we'll go. So we went and landed at
Menard. There's a little airstrip at Menard right
by the Coatman Co-op. And we landed there and went
hunting. And that night, he said, let's go down to
London. and eat a chicken fried steak at the cafe. I
said, let's do. And the dance hall was right next
door. And they are still on Saturday nights
dancing there. And we were seated there. And there
was a one-inch wall made out of 1 by 12s between the
dance hall and the cafe where we were seated. I
said, I think I heard the music start in there. I
think the dance has started. And he put his hand up
on the wall. He said, no. It's not throbbing
enough. The dance hadn't started. I'll tell you
when the dance starts. But we just got there to
escape. And Mr. Rutter was much better, more
skilled at breaking away from it all when he'd
reached the saturation point. than Dr. Williams
was. He could unwind pretty well for a while and
then go back. But Dr. Williams couldn't. And
again, I think both of their intensity with their
job and lack of Williams would play like he was
playing golf. But his mind was still on him. And I
think that killed both of them. Let's make believe
that you are in a position to give advice to the A&M
board and campus leadership today? What would it
be for now and the future? The A&M board and what?
And the campus leadership as well, the president,
the provost, et cetera.
I think one thing I would advise, if I was in that
high and mighty position, is to look at ways that we
might
over a planned and graceful period of time reduce
the enrollment. I think it's way too high.
And in doing that in an organized way, get back to
what both Williams and Rutter hoped for, and that
is personalize the classroom situation, get it
down to reasonable numbers where they do know
Professor Monroe and a little bit about him and
vice versa. And that the class sizes be reduced in
particular areas to where it should be.
Student-teacher ratio is something that really
bothers me. And yet, in 1950, when I took chemistry
a sophomore level chemistry there were 333
students in that class but i think we're losing a
lot of the closeness between students and faculty
that we had at one time and uh i think as you had
pointed out earlier with one example that we're
with that we've broken down a great deal on our
interest in counseling with students about
courses to take How do you compensate for a guy
that's weak? And I don't think we know them that
well, like the poor boy that jumped off the
building the other day. I'm not sure anybody could
have saved him. But those kind of things are
rearing up more and more. And I think it all goes
back to what Dr. Williams said. You get above
35,000, and the place begins to break up. And I
think we've seen a lot of that. The political part,
namely the Jesus himself, I don't know, might have
to intervene, but to get the selection of board
members back to something that's other than
political and get people on these boards that
understand higher education, that's critical.
And if the board and the administrators can't get
along and can't agree because of politics, I think
that's a sad state of affairs. That one I don't know
how you'll ever solve unless you have the right
kind of governor in there. Do today's former
student association leadership
and today's regents, are they people of lesser
stature than 20, 30 years ago? They seem to be.
Maybe with the former students, we're dealing
with so much volume. But you don't see, I don't see,
I see a lot of people in the key positions that I've
never heard of before. Like when I was talking to
Dick Hervey. He was rattling off who the key
leaders were when he was the executive director.
And it was Jay Harold Dunn and Conley from... Dick
Conley. Dick Conley. Dick Winters. And he just
started rattling off... John Younger. Yeah, and
they were all corporate presidents. people that
could have called the governor's office and
gotten through quickly. Today's leaders are
good, decent people, but they are just middle
class folks like the rest of us that don't have
quite as much muscle as they might have had. Those
leaders, those caliber of people are bound to be
out there. But to me, they're just not coming
forward to serve like they did at that time. back in
those days. And the same thing with the region.
Somehow, regardless of what the system is, we're
not getting the kind of people that come to campus
and say, Mr. President, what do you want us to do to
support you? It's what I want you to do for me. It may
be contrary in all ways to the good of the
university. Let's see. Did I ask you for favorite
Williams anecdote? Yeah. Humor? Yeah, we got some
of those. Okay. I'm inclined to say let's quit for
today. And then we get into student. Okay. On
another day, we'll do your student days. That'd be
fine. Because it's 315, 320 now. I'll start by
saying that...
when I really hadn't thought seriously yet about
coming to A&M. My dad was such a rabid Aggie fan,
having never been to college of any sort, though.
But he was so impressed by the men in San Marcos that
had gone to A&M that he decided in his mind that that
must be the best school in the world and wanted very
much for me to go. And the way he got me to go, and
we'll start this next time, I went to him one day. I
said, Daddy, my trombone's worn out. I can nearly
see through the slide. I'm playing football and I
don't get to play at halftime anyway. I think I'll
just quit the band. Boy, that was a knife in the
heart for a professional musician. He says, no,
no, you're not going to quit the band. Here's what
I'll do, he said, about that old worn-out horn. He
said, if that's an embarrassment to you, I'm going
to the San Antonio Music Company and buy you a super
old gold-colored trombone, the finest made. And
he said, that'll probably cost me $3 or $4 a week,
but I'll pay for it that way if you promise me that
you will play that trombone in the Aggie band. I
said, OK. And I didn't give it any more thought than
that, and I did. And after I was married halfway
through school, the band was tough those first two
years. I can tell you, well, I will, horror
stories. But when I got married, living in
Collegeview, I thought, now here's my chance to
gracefully get out of this thing and have more free
time and not all the misery that goes with the
promptness required of somebody in the band. And
I've been in a hard field of study, and I need to
study more. So easy. And then I thought, now wait
just a minute. I think he meant four years, not two.
And I'm not going to forget. And I've always been
proud that I did not when it would have been so easy.
I would say I didn't have a car and a bicycle. And you
still think he did mean to for four years? I think
so. I know the spirit was there in that. Had you
visited the campus? Only for a football game or
two. Not many of those. We couldn't afford to. I saw
as many Aggie games in Austin as I did here because
it's just 28 miles. Now you came in 49? 49. So you
were a freshman in college a year after me, so I can
identify with those words. And I was in the last
freshman class to attend the Riverside campus.
The Riverside campus.